Hints and Tips Journal 

The following Journal was sent to the Committee on Moral Climate from Dr. Claire R. 
Langstrom. She was one of the investigators sent by that committee to the city of Xi. 

The investigative team disappeared. A second expedition, from the Academy, consisting 
of two men, was sent after the Moral Climate investigators disappeared. Those men 
also disappeared. 

Touchdown 

We arrived. There was no sign, no movement, no Indication of any kind that the ancient Martian 
city of XI was inhabited. But that was a ruse: Stendahl was here somewhere, wallowing in his 
books. I have read about the legends of this place. The Martians believed it contained the great¬ 
est force In the universe. Obviously it did not. Otherwise why would the Martians have died cut? I 
wanted to explore as much of the city as I could on one energy charge. I decided to take only a 
data recorder and a mapper with me, along with a helmet. 

I landed near one of the canals, The water was clear and flowed faster than I thought It would. I 
turned around and walked away from the canal toward high canyon walls. I could see Xi through 
a breach in the canyon wall. Mo wonder this place stayed unexplored. It lay on the floor of a hid¬ 
den canyon, perhaps With only one entrance. I noticed there were side routes branching to the 
left and right, I will explore those later if I have time. 

Transporter Building 

! iome of the Martian machinery, though neglected for centuries, still worked. As I approached 
the city buildings* their doers opened for me, I entered the first building on the right that I came 
to. It contained a device that looked like my Rocket T s transporter. Unfortunately, the device was 
locked. It seemed obvious to me that manipulating the nine tiles with Martian symbols on them 
would operate the transporter. The same strange symbol framed the device. 

Pome Building 

While exploring the large Dome Building to the west of the Transporter Building, I found a con¬ 
sole with Martian writing on It, Since I could not translate It without the Scanner, I went back 
to the Rocket for it (I should have brought it with me from the startl). It translated the 
Martian symbols on the console into numbers. And I recognized the Martian symbol for the 
number 15. I had seen it before, repeated many times, on the tile grid In the Transporter 








Building* This suggested the tile grid required the numbered tiles to be placed so that the 
columns, rows, and diagonals add to 15* 

Return to the Transporter Building 

I returned to the Transporter Building, armed with the knowledge that the tile grid was a num¬ 
ber puzzle. After using my scanner to translate the symbols displayed on the console in the 
Pome Building, 1 learned that the tiles in this puzzle were arranged In numerical order in their 
Initial positions. Tile numbers one through five were In order in a vertical column to the left of 
the grid, and tiles six through nine were in order in a vertical column to the right of the grid. 

To activate the Transporter Tube, all the rows, columns* and diagonals needed to add up to 15. I 
attempted to solve the puzzle using logic. For example, I concluded that the number five needed 
to go in the center space, and that the number one could not go In a corner. I will try to devise 
a complete solution In my working notes. 

Using the transporter, I was taken to the roof of the building, where a Martian Band Yacht was 
moored. However, I found nothing on the Yacht except some stored images. This was odd, Why 
was the transporter so carefully locked* if there was nothing of value,here? 

Outside, I saw a ghost. I could net record It with the data recorder, Was it really there or was 
It a figment of my imagination? It looked like a Martian, strolling through the city. It suddenly 
appeared and then It just vanished. 

Stendah! House 

l explored the large building in the middle of the city. This was the house built by that moral 
degenerate. Stendahl. If it were not for the scanner, I could never have made it through all six 
rooms, or even from the first room to the second. To the naked eye and the unguarded mind, 
there were no doors between one room and the next, But the scanner showed me that what 1 
saw as impenetrable walls were illusions. The house was full of eerie sounds, ghostly projected 
images, tricks, and traps. I found a crystal fragment inside a skull in one room. All of the doors 
from room to room allowed passage In one direction only, never letting me retrace my path. I 
could only go forward, always seemingly into a trap. Was Stendahl trying to protect his 
accursed bocks, or was the house intended for more sinister purposes? 

In the working notes, I have kept track of the steps that led me successf ully through t he house. 
The library in this house was a scandal. It contained hundreds of banned books. Among them,« 


found an Interesting book about a binary numbering system, I thought t could use this informa¬ 
tion In the Jail because the force field in the Jail seemed to have been controlled by a binary lock. 

Jail 

A building on the north edge of the city contained a force field. It looked like it was built to be a 
Jail. There was a Martian control panel on a pedestal next to it. The controls consisted of six 
vertical bars. Each of them could have been either up or down. Some setting of the six bars 
should shut the force field off. Fortunately, the book in the library of the Stendahl House helped 
me figure this mechanism out. The code sequence was based on a variation of the binary number 
system. Successfully moving all of them to the down position released the force field. 

On the first move, only the left-most bar was moveable. On each successive move, only one other 
bar besides the one just moved would move. I solved the problem by trial and error* using a sim¬ 
ple rule: never move the same bar twice In a row. After 42 moves, all of the bars were In the 
down position and the force field was deactivated. I moved most of the bars up and down many 
times, but only at the end of the sequence were all six bars down, 

Return to the Band Yacht 

I merging from the Jail, I saw a Band Yacht flying over the city! It landed on the roof of the 
hvmsporter Building. Was this another Martian hallucination from the past? Was this city, or 
nomething in it, affecting my mind, causing me to see things that were not here? Was it a dis¬ 
tortion of time itself? Or did a Band Yacht really go ty? 

I could not resist returning to the Transporter Building and using the transporter again. There 
• .renin I to be no change In the Sand Yacht moored there; but when I scanned Its control panels, 
t ejw a hidden crystal fragment. Once I scanned it, the crystal was easy to obtain. It was 
another part of a key. 

Art Gallery 

To the cast of the Jail was a building I call the Art Gallery because it had a number of Martian 
paintings In It. It also had a sliding tile mechanism. The tiled image, when completed correctly* 
was a map of the tunnels leading to the Archive that holds the Tx Hilt Hja, The tunnel map was 
t he same as the tunnel maf that [ saw in the Bower Building. When the puzzle was solved, the 
tap In the puzzle was located one square above the lower right corner rather than in the lower 
r ighi rjrner itself. 61 nee this mocha n:s: scrambled the tiles randomly each time it was activat¬ 
ed, I was not able to record a specific sequence of moves in my notes. 









After completing the map, 1 discovered that there was a crystal hidden behind the map, which I 
found by scanning, It could not be seen on the scanner until the map was correctly assembled. 

Cave Dwelling 

On the western outskirts of the city was a cave. It seemed to have been inhabited at one time. 
The artifacts there were Martian, Upon the cave wall, I found a crystal. When I touched St. five 
crystals appeared in the pattern of a horizontal rectangle with a fifth point centered above the 
rectangle. Two of the crystals highlighted in sequence, and a line appeared connecting those two. 
I found that when 1 touched a correct point, the point highlighted briefly and a line appeared 
connecting the last connected point with the point I just touched. When I touched an incorrect 
point, the point highlighted briefly and the last line added to the figure disappeared, setting the 
diagram back one step. When the diagram was complete, an image appeared, l did not know what 
it meant. 

Crystal Fragments 

While exploring XII found Martian energy crystals. I detected them with the scanner. My helmet 
confirmed what they were and. when I chose to acquire them, their energy automatically charged 
my energy cells. Using this Martian energy did not adversely affect my equipment, and it allowed 
me to spend more time in the city without having to return to the ship. 

I also found some unusual crystal fragments that, when analyzed, proved to be piece© of a key. 
One of these pieces was located In a 6and Yacht which was parked on the roof of the 
Transporter Building. 1 had to assemble the key In order to determine whether or not the key 
itself—or what it would unlock—posed a threat to the morality of humankind. After finding all 
four pieces I brought them back to the Rocket's Tool Mt, There I manipulated them into position. 
I then understood the significance of the Image from the cave dwelling; it was a view of the four 
Archive key fragment© correctly oriented for re-assembly, 

To assemble the fragments, I first rotated them so that their flat sides faced me. Then I rotat¬ 
ed each piece clockwise or counterclockwise so that the smooth edge faced out, toward the 
walls of the analyzer, and the jagged edges faced in. I had to notate seme niece© to flip i hem 
over so that all the jagged edges would face in, l oriented the longer pieces fjrst and thru the 
squareish ones. When the four pieces were oriented correctly they pulled themselves together 
and became one solid crystal. 


Spender 

I ran into a madman named Spender. He claimed to know the secrets of the universe. He threat¬ 
ened to kill me if I attempted to find the Tx Hilt Hja. He kept talking about a secret Archive, I 
assumed that the key 1 assembled had something to do with It. He told me he knew I had the 
key, and he would kill me for it. He was raving something about protecting the Archive, and 
destroying and scattering the key, I shot him. But he was only wounded and got away. He stalks 
me now. I catch sight of him sometimes, I fear he has abducted the missing members of my 
team and taken them to the Archive, 

The Archive 

I Found the opening to the Archive, From the middle of the city in front of the steel gate posts, I 
walked as far east as I could go. When I reached the canyon wall, I turned south. I went on as far 
as I could until I was blocked by the canyon wall. Then, 1 turned east, The opening to the Archive 
was hidden In the wall. I touched the door and it opened. Beyond the door was a tunnel maze, I 
hate mazes, but ft could have been worse; that maniac Bpender could have been in there, hunt¬ 
ing me, I finally came to a large chamber, it contained consoles of the kind I had seen in other 
parts of the city, I was running out of energy, 

Otv console contained a purple crystal on a stand—a Martian Singing Book. I stood at the dis¬ 
play case covered with Martian symbols and touched them one at a time. Each symbol I 
touched produced a musical tone. There were four triangular spaces next to the Martian key 
pnd. Maybe the four symbols that appeared In these four triangles are needed to obtain the all- 
Import, mt secret with which Spender is so obsessed, 

I hr bill tons were shaped like Martian glyphs, but the glyph© had no particular meaning. That Is, 
they had no particular meaning to a human. Archeologists have determined that books like this 
are musical Instruments. They were as familiar to Martians as piano© are to humans. I assumed 
that playlrit the correct notes on the book would cause something to happen, Martian melodies 
were composed of tone pairings. Tone© were carefully selected and combined by the musician to 
create a pair. Then, pairs were used to compose songs. The order of a pair is significant. Do-re is 
no': tb .? same as lie io, I hit random key© on the keyboard and, by accident> made a Martian 
pair One of the tn 1 ,gles 1ft up. showing a Martian glyph, 1 fumbled aroimd trying to light more 
tiangles. After piv,s./ng the keys 15 times, the Book pushed me away. I tried again. 







By continued experimentation, I found the correct notes to have revealed all four glyphs, I have 
recorded this in my working notes. 

When the triangles were lit, each one showed one glyph, making a sequence of four from top to 
bottom. The glyph shown In each lit triangle, and thus the sequence of four, was always the same. 
This suggested that the four glyphs—arranged in exactly this sequence—had some meaning. 
Because the glyphs did not represent letters or words, they could not be translated, ft was 
possible that they were the notes of another song. As of this writing, no conclusive evidence 
has been found which would identify what the four-note son% meant. However, I was able to 
translate the title of the chant which produces them: it was called “Revelation." 

Through another door at the end of the large chamber was a smaller room. In it was a display 
case topped with a row of blank rectangles. The fact that four glyphs could be revealed in the 
Singing Book and that this strange case could accommodate four glyphs could not be a coinci¬ 
dence, I also concluded that this case might hold the thing about which Spender is so con¬ 
cerned, The significance of the Earth objects in another display case eluded me for the moment. 
But the significance of the song from the Singing Book was dean The four glyphs could be used 
to unlock the final case, 

Since I did not know what this case would reveal, an# was almost out of energy, I returned this 
log to my Rocket, twill leave this log there and return to open the case. 


Dr. Langstrom's Journal ends here. 
She was never seen again.